Create open source licensing standard (#85)
HO-CTO/engineering-guidance-and-standards: docs/standards/open-source-licensing.md

---
layout: sub-navigation
order: 1
title: Open source licensing
date: git Last Modified
id: SEGAS-00004
tags:
- Source management
---

Last updated: {{ page.date | postDate }}
Tags: {{ tags | join(', ') }}

Open source code repositories maintained by the Home Office must be given an appropriate licence, this explains to users the terms under which that code can be used or modified.

This standard is broadly similar to the [GDS Licensing Guidelines](https://gds-way.cloudapps.digital/manuals/licensing.html#licensing), and is in part based on that content.

---

## Requirement(s)

- [Open source repositories MUST contain a licence file](#open-source-repositories-must-contain-a-license.md-file)
- [Open source repositories MUST have a licence that adheres to the Open Source Definition](#open-source-repositories-must-have-a-license-that-adheres-to-the-open-source-definition)

> - [Open source repositories MUST state Crown Copyright](#open-source-repositories-must-have-an-osi-license)

Reviewer: Check spelling of "licence" in the file names

Author: Thanks - needed to tidy up more than just the spelling of license here it turns out

### Open source repositories MUST contain a licence file

> Ensure that there is a LICENCE or LICENCE.md file in the root of your repository. This should be included in the repository as early as possible. The LICENCE file should contain minimal or no other information beyond the licence itself and the copyright notice. See the [LICENCE file for this site](https://github.com/HO-CTO/engineering-guidance-and-standards/blob/main/LICENCE) for an example.

Reviewer 2: Should this be LICEN**S**E as well? (Rather than LICEN**C**E.)

I know it's an Americanism, but I think these are pretty standard files so we make be braking convention otherwise.

Author: Following the lead from GDS on that usage. Github crawlers for LICENSE files will pick up LICENCE files as well so I don't think this is a major issue

### Open source repositories MUST have a licence that adheres to the Open Source Definition

> At the Home Office, you should in most cases use [the MIT License](https://opensource.org/license/mit/) for open source code.
> 
> If your code or project is incompatible with the MIT License, you can select a different licence, provided it adheres to the Open Source Definition. The Open Source Initiative (OSI) maintains a [list of approved licences that meet the definition](https://opensource.org/licenses/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the Home Office, you should in most cases use [the MIT Licence](https://opensource.org/license/mit/) for open source code.

If your code or project is incompatible with the MIT Licence, you can select a different licence, provided it adheres to the Open Source Definition. The Open Source Initiative (OSI) maintains a [list of approved licences that meet the definition](https://opensource.org/licenses/).
```

Author: I have never spent so much time paying attention to the spelling of 'license'!

I have tried to follow the guidance here https://gds-way.cloudapps.digital/manuals/licensing.html#language (TLDR - "you would *license* your software under a particular *licence*, such as *the MIT License*"

#### Open documentation

> Where repositories produce websites serving documentation, you should include the [Open Government Licence (OGL)](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/) for the documentation. This is in addition to the LICENCE file, and should be visible on the website, for example contained in the footer.

Reviewer 2: Does it need to be 'included' or merely linked to?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where repositories produce websites serving documentation, you should make it clear the documentation is licensed under the [Open Government Licence (OGL)](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/). This is in addition to the LICENCE file, and should be visible on the website, for example contained in the footer.
```

(Revives some of @zuzak's language.)

Reviewer 2: Should we also link to the GOV.UK Design System for an example of this?: https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/footer/

Author: Agree on all of this comment. Examples are good, as part of this PR this site will itself be an example so we can point to that as well

> ### Open source repositories MUST state Crown Copyright

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this should read 'Original open-source repositories'?

Imagine if we forked someone else's repo; it would be wrong to change the copyright assignment. Instead we would simply add our own. (Assuming that we added our own work to it.)

Reviewer 2: There's a side issue to this which is how we should handle code contributions from the outside.

Possibly, we should require that contributors assign copyright to the Crown.

Reviewer 2: Or maybe, this should read:
```md
### Open source repositories MUST state who owns the copyright
```
And then clarify that the work that civil servants and government contractors create is owned by the crown and give and example of declaring this.
